## 1.6.0

### March 11, 2024

### 💪 New features

- Adds new composable `useFormKitContext` for access to a the context object of the parent `FormKit` component — or any other `FormKit` component in the tree. Optionally, you can provide an effect callback that is run when the context is available.
- Adds new composable `useFormKitContextById` for access to the context object of any `FormKit` component with an explicit id. Optionally, you can provide an effect callback that is run when the context is available.
- Adds new composable `useFormKitNodeById` for access to a the node object of any `FormKit` component with an explicit id. Optionally, you can provide an effect callback that is run when the node is available.
- Adds intellisense autocomplete for the `type` prop of the FormKit component (#1241).
- Adds new `stopWatch` function to the `@formkit/core` package that allows de-registering receipts from the `watchRegistry` function.
- Adds type generic to `getNode<T>()` function.
- New integration with `@nuxt/tailwindcss` that automatically includes the `formkit.theme.ts` file in the tailwind `content`.
- Adds new `currency` and `unit` icons.
- Adds new `library` prop to `FormKit` and `FormKitMessages` components that allows you to include additional components for the input schema, for example, when using `sections-schema` to modify the input (#1145) (#1137).
- The `value` type of a `FormKit` component that is passed a `FormKitTypeDefinition` is now inferred from the `FormKitTypeDefinition`.

### 🐛 Bug fixes

- Fixes bug in `changeLocale` that caused updated locale to not be used on new nodes (#1143).
- Fixes tree shaking of the `@formkit/icons` package (#1184).
- Adds `FormKitIcon` component to the `autoImport` feature of the Nuxt module (#1168).
- Fixes types for `BeforeStepChangeData` (#1224).
- Fixes types for the `datetime-local` input type (#1129).
- Vue is now a `peerDependency` of `@formkit/vue` to reduce the incidents of multiple Vue instances in the same project (#1160).
- Adds tabindex and `role="button"` to the icon wrappers when a click event is added to the icon (#1210).


::Callout
---
type: "warning"
label: "Custom Input Types"
---
The `type` argument of the `FormKit` component now requires a matching type in the `FormKitInputProps` type for TypeScript support. If you are using custom inputs and have supplied a module augmentation for `FormKitInputProps`, you will need to [update the `FormKitInputProps` type to include your types](/essentials/custom-inputs).
::
